Changelog: add qualtran and sparse execution (#7241)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.41.0.md

<h4>End-to-end Sparse Execution 🌌</h4>

> * `default.qubit` now applies sparse matrices directly to the state vector under-the-hood, resulting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Sparse data structures in compressed-sparse-row (csr) format are now supported end-to-end in PennyLane, resulting
```

> * `default.qubit` now applies sparse matrices directly to the state vector under-the-hood, resulting

Author: Does that go in the LQ changelog or here? :eyes:

>   in faster execution for large sparse objects [(#6883)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6883) [(#7139)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7139) [(#7191)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7191)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  in faster execution for large sparse objects. [(#6883)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6883) [(#7139)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7139) [(#7191)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7191)
```

>   ```python

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  Sparse-array input and execution is now supported on `default.qubit` with a variety of templates, 
  preserving sparsity throughout the entire simulation. 
  
  The following templates support sparse data structures:
  
  <list of templates>
  
  ```python
````

  import scipy
  import numpy as np

  mat = np.kron(np.identity(2**12), qml.X.compute_matrix())
  sparse_mat = scipy.sparse.csr_array(mat)

  dev = qml.device('default.qubit')
  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(mat):
      qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat, wires=range(13))
      return qml.state()
  ```

> * Support for sparse representation in operators is expanded.

Reviewer: I would mush this into the first bullet point :)

> * Support for sparse representation in operators is expanded.
>   
>   Sparse input is now possible for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support for sparse representation in operators is expanded.  
  Sparse input is now possible for:
```

    sparse_state = scipy.sparse.csr_array([0,1,0,0])
    sparse_mat = scipy.sparse.csr_array(qml.X.compute_matrix())

    dev = qml.device('default.qubit')
    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit():
        qml.StatePrep(sparse_state, wires=range(2))
        # qml.BlockEncode(sparse_mat,wires=range(2))
        qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat, wires=range(1))
        qml.ctrl(qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat,wires=0),control=1)
        return qml.state()
    ```
    ```pycon
    >>> circuit()
    array([0.+0.j, 1.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j])
    ```
  
  Sparse representations can be obtained for:
  * `qml.SWAP` [(#6965)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6965)
  * `Controlled` operations [(#6994)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6994)
  
  ```pycon
  >>> op_matrix = qml.SWAP(wires=[0,1]).sparse_matrix()
  >>> type(op_matrix)
  <class 'scipy.sparse._coo.coo_matrix'>
  >>> print(op_matrix)
  (0, 0)	1
  (1, 2)	1
  (2, 1)	1
  (3, 3)	1
  >>> sparse_mat = scipy.sparse.csr_array(qml.X.compute_matrix())
  >>> op = qml.ctrl(qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat,wires=0),control=1)
  >>> type(op.sparse_matrix())
  >>> print(op.sparse_matrix())
  (0, 0)	1
  (1, 1)	1
  (2, 3)	1
  (3, 2)	1
  ```

> * All operators that support `Operator.sparse_matrix` can now choose a format for the sparse matrix and support the wire_order parameter [(#6995)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6995).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Operators that have a `sparse_matrix` method can now choose a sparse-matrix format and the order of their wires.
  [(#6995)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6995).
```

Also might not hurt to mention what the formats are and what their keyword arg string is :)

  ```pycon
  >>> op = qml.CNOT([0,1])
  >>> type(op.sparse_matrix(format='dok'))
  scipy.sparse._dok.dok_matrix
  >>> type(op.sparse_matrix(format='csc'))
  scipy.sparse._csc.csc_matrix
  >>> print(op.sparse_matrix(wire_order=[1,0]))
  (0, 0)	1.0
  (1, 3)	1.0
  (2, 2)	1.0
  (3, 1)	1.0
  >>> print(op.sparse_matrix(wire_order=[0,1]))
  (0, 0)	1
  (1, 1)	1
  (2, 3)	1
  (3, 2)	1
  ```

> * Sparse objects are now supported in `qml.math`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Sparse functionality is now available in `qml.math`:
```

  * `qml.math.sqrt_matrix_sparse` is available to compute the square root of a sparse Hermitian matrix.
    [(#6976)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6976)

>   * General `qml.math` functions can now correctly handle sparse matrices by dispatching to  `scipy.sparse.linalg`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Most `qml.math` functions can now correctly handle sparse matrices as input by dispatching to  `scipy.sparse.linalg` internally. 
```

Most? All?

<h4>End-to-end Sparse Execution 🌌</h4>

* Sparse data structures in compressed-sparse-row (csr) format are now supported end-to-end
  in PennyLane, resulting in faster execution for large sparse objects.
  [(#6883)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6883) 
  [(#7139)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7139) 
  [(#7191)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7191)  

>   Sparse-array input and execution is now supported on `default.qubit` and `lightning.qubit`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  Sparse-array input and execution is now supported on `default.qubit` and `lightning.qubit`
```

Author: Added in upcoming commit.

  with a variety of templates, preserving sparsity throughout the entire simulation.
  

>   Specifically, following templates now support sparse data structures:

Author: Fixed the "the". But intentionally leaving out the "as input" because Controlled and Swap don't take any input.

<h4>End-to-end Sparse Execution 🌌</h4>

> * Sparse data structures in compressed-sparse-row (csr) format are now supported end-to-end in PennyLane, resulting
>   in faster execution for large sparse objects 
>   [(#6883)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6883) 
>   [(#7139)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7139) 
>   [(#7191)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7191)
>   Sparse-array input and execution is now supported on `default.qubit` with a variety of templates, 
>   preserving sparsity throughout the entire simulation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Sparse data structures in compressed-sparse-row (csr) format are now supported end-to-end
  in PennyLane, resulting in faster execution for large sparse objects.
  [(#6883)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6883) 
  [(#7139)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7139) 
  [(#7191)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7191)  
  Sparse-array input and execution is now supported on `default.qubit` with a variety of templates, 
  preserving sparsity throughout the entire simulation. 
```

    dev = qml.device('default.qubit')
    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit():
        qml.StatePrep(sparse_state, wires=range(2))
        # qml.BlockEncode(sparse_mat,wires=range(2))
        qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat, wires=range(1))
        qml.ctrl(qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat,wires=0),control=1)
        return qml.state()
    ```
    ```pycon
    >>> circuit()
    array([0.+0.j, 1.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j])
    ```
  
  Sparse representations can be obtained for:
  * `qml.SWAP` [(#6965)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6965)
  * `Controlled` operations [(#6994)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6994)
  
  ```pycon
  >>> op_matrix = qml.SWAP(wires=[0,1]).sparse_matrix()
  >>> type(op_matrix)
  <class 'scipy.sparse._coo.coo_matrix'>
  >>> print(op_matrix)
  (0, 0)	1
  (1, 2)	1
  (2, 1)	1
  (3, 3)	1
  >>> sparse_mat = scipy.sparse.csr_array(qml.X.compute_matrix())
  >>> op = qml.ctrl(qml.QubitUnitary(sparse_mat,wires=0),control=1)
  >>> type(op.sparse_matrix())
  >>> print(op.sparse_matrix())
  (0, 0)	1
  (1, 1)	1
  (2, 3)	1
  (3, 2)	1
  ```

* Operators that have a `sparse_matrix` method can now choose a sparse-matrix format and the order of their wires.

>   [(#6995)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6995).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  [(#6995)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6995)
```

  Also added ``qml.pauli.trace_inner_product`` that can handle batches of dense matrices.
  [(#6811)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6811)

* ``qml.structure_constants`` now accepts and outputs matrix inputs using the ``matrix`` keyword.
  [(#6861)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6861)

<h4>Qualtran Integration 🔗</h4>

> * It's now easy to use [Qualtran](https://qualtran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) bloqs in PennyLane. The new ``qml.FromBloq`` class translates [Qualtran bloqs](https://qualtran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bloqs/index.html#bloqs-library) into equivalent PennyLane operators [(#7148)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7148).
>   
>   `qml.FromBloq` requires two inputs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It's now possible to use [Qualtran](https://qualtran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) bloqs in PennyLane
  with the new :func:`qml.FromBloq <pennylane.FromBloq>` class. 
  [(#7148)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7148)
  
  :func:`qml.FromBloq <pennylane.FromBloq>` translates [Qualtran bloqs](https://qualtran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bloqs/index.html#bloqs-library) 
  into equivalent PennyLane operators. It requires two inputs:
```

>   * bloq: an initialized Qualtran Bloq
>   * wires: the wires the operator acts on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * `bloq`: an initialized Qualtran Bloq
  * `wires`: the wires the operator acts on
```

>   The following example applies a PennyLane Operator and Qualtran Bloq in the same circuit:

Reviewer: 🚀

  ```python
  >>> from qualtran.bloqs.basic_gates import CNOT
  
  >>> dev = qml.device("default.qubit")
  >>> @qml.qnode(dev)
  ... def circuit():
  ...    qml.X(wires=0)
  ...    qml.FromBloq(CNOT(), wires=[0, 1])
  ...    return qml.state()
  >>> circuit()
  array([0.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 1.+0.j])
  ```

> * The new ``qml.bloq_registers`` helps to determine the required wires for more complicated ``Bloqs``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new function called :func:`qml.bloq_registers <pennylane.bloq_registers>` is available to help determine 
  the required wires for more complicated Qualtran ``Bloqs``.
```

Reviewer: Also, can we give an example of a general condition for which I'd need to use `bloq_registers`?

>   This function returns a dictionary of register names and wires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This function returns a dictionary of register names and wires given a Qualtran Bloq.
```

  ```pycon
  >>> from qualtran.bloqs.phase_estimation import RectangularWindowState, TextbookQPE
  >>> from qualtran.bloqs.basic_gates import ZPowGate

>   ```
> 
>   ```pycon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
